# Host Services in JavaScript Functions
The JavaScript functions that Nex executes are run inside a [V8](https://v8.dev/) sandbox, which is often also contained within a Firecracker sandbox. As a result, these JavaScript functions don't have the same kind of freedom of access to capabilities that other function types (e.g. Node.js in a cloud provider). However, we've made the most common use cases available
by default through _host services_.

Host services aren't just access to arbitrary capabilities, they're access to _managed_ capabilities that are designed to be pre-provisioned and ready to go, so function
developers don't have to write provisiong code, they can focus solely on the capability abstractions they need.

## HTTP Client
If you want to make HTTP calls from your function, you can do so with the HTTP client:

```javascript
get = this.hostServices.http.get('https://example.org');
```

All of the HTTP methods are supported as functions:
* `get`
* `post`
* `put`
* `patch`
* `del`
* `head`

## Key-Value Store
Every Nex-managed JavaScript function has access to an abstraction over a key-value store, which is internally backed by a NATS Key-Value bucket. 

```javascript
this.hostServices.kv.set('hello', payload);
this.hostServices.kv.delete('hello');

this.hostServices.kv.set('hello2', payload);
return {
  keys: this.hostServices.kv.keys(),
  hello2: this.hostServices.kv.get('hello2')
}
```

Again, note that you don't have to manually or explicitly provision the bucket. You can assume that your function has its own, isolated bucket and that it is
safe in a multi-tenant environment.

## Object Store
Every Nex-managed function has access to a managed object store. The following code shows how JavaScript can interact with this store:

```javascript
(subject, payload) => {
  this.hostServices.objectStore.put('hello', payload);
  this.hostServices.objectStore.delete('hello');

  this.hostServices.objectStore.put('hello2', payload);
  return {
    list: this.hostServices.objectStore.list(),
    hello2: String.fromCharCode(...this.hostServices.objectStore.get('hello2'))
  }
};
```

## Core Messaging
JavaScript functions _receive_ messages on their trigger subjects, which are specified at deployment time. To publish or make requests, host services
provides access to a core NATS black box.

```javascript
this.hostServices.messaging.publish('hello.world', payload);

req = this.hostServices.messaging.request('hello.world.request', payload);

reqMany = this.hostServices.messaging.requestMany('hello.world.request.many', payload);
```
