## NATS Cluster Protocol

The NATS server clustering protocol describes the messages passed between NATS servers within a [cluster](/nats_server/clustering.md) to share subscription state, forward messages, and share cluster topology.  It is a simple, text-based publish/subscribe style protocol. Servers communicate with each other through a regular TCP/IP socket using a small set of protocol operations that are terminated by newline.

The NATS server implements a [zero allocation byte parser](https://youtu.be/ylRKac5kSOk?t=10m46s) that is fast and efficient.

The NATS cluster protocol is very similar to that of the NATS client protocol.  In the context of a cluster, it can be helpful to visualize a server being a proxy operating on behalf of its connected clients, subscribing, unsubscribing, sending and receiving messages.

## NATS Cluster protocol conventions

**Subject names and wildcards**: The NATS cluster protocol has the same features and restrictions as the client with respect to subject names and wildcards, with one addition - a server can publish subjects prefixed with `_SYS.`, which is reserved for messages that are internally generated by a server.

**Field Delimiters**: The fields of NATS protocol messages are delimited by whitespace characters '` `' (space)  or `\t` (tab).
Multiple whitespace characters will be treated as a single field delimiter.

**Newlines**: Like other text-based protocols, NATS uses `CR` followed by `LF` (`CR+LF`, `\r\n`, `0x0D0A`) to terminate protocol messages.  This newline sequence is also used to mark the beginning of the actual message payload in a `PUB` or `MSG` protocol message.

## NATS Cluster protocol messages

The following table briefly describes the NATS cluster protocol messages.
As in the client protocol, the NATS protocol operation names are case insensitive, thus `SUB foo 1\r\n` and `sub foo 1\r\n` are equivalent.

Click the name to see more detailed information, including syntax:


| OP Name              | Sent By          |    Description
| -------------------- |:-----------------|:--------------------------------------------
| [`INFO`](#INFO)      | All Servers      | Sent after initial TCP/IP connection and to update cluster knowledge
| [`CONNECT`](#CONNECT)| All Servers      | Sent to establish a route
| [`PUB`](#PUB)        | Sending Server   | Sent when a message is published by a client.
| [`SUB`](#SUB)        | All Servers      | Subscribes to a subject on behalf of interested clients.
| [`UNSUB`](#UNSUB)    | All Servers      | Unsubscribe (or auto-unsubscribe) from subject.
| [`MSG`](#MSG)        | Receiving Server | Delivers a message payload to a subscriber on the local server.
| [`PING`](#PINGPONG)  | All Servers      | PING keep-alive message
| [`PONG`](#PINGPONG)  | All Servers      | PONG keep-alive response
| [`+OK/-ERR`](#OKERR) | All Servers      | Indicates a protocol error. Will cause the server to disconnect.


The following sections explain each protocol message.

## <a name="INFO"></a>INFO

#### Description

As soon as the server accepts a connection from another server, it will send information about itself and the configuration and security requirements that are necessary for the other server to successfully authenticate with the server and exchange messages.

The connecting server also sends an `INFO` message.  The accepting server will add an `ip` field containing the address and port of the connecting server, and forward the new server's `INFO` message to all servers it is routed to.

Any servers in a cluster receiving an `INFO` message with an `ip` field will attempt to connect to the server at that address, unless already connected.  This propagation of `INFO` messages on behalf of a connecting server provides automatic discovery of new servers joining a cluster.

#### Syntax

`INFO {["option_name":option_value],...}`

The valid options are as follows:

* `server_id`: The unique identifier of the NATS server
* `version`: The version of the NATS server
* `go`: The version of golang the NATS server was built with
* `host`: The host specified in the cluster parameter/options
* `port`: The port number specified in the cluster parameter/options
* `auth_required`: If this is set, then the server should try to authenticate upon connect.
* `tls_required`: If this is set, then the server must authenticate using TLS.
* `max_payload`: Maximum payload size that the server will accept.
* `connect_urls` : A list of server urls that a client can connect to.
* `ip`:  Optional route connection address of a server, `nats-route://<hostname>:<port>`

#### Example

Below is an example of an `INFO` string received by a NATS server, with the `ip` field.

`INFO {"server_id":"KP19vTlB417XElnv8kKaC5","version":"0.9.4","go":"","host":"localhost","port":5222,"auth_required":false,"tls_required":false,"tls_verify":false,"max_payload":1048576,"ip":"nats-route://127.0.0.1:5222/","connect_urls":["localhost:4222"]}`

## <a name="CONNECT"></a>CONNECT

#### Description

The `CONNECT` message is analogous to the `INFO` message. Once the NATS server has established a TCP/IP socket connection with another server, and an `INFO` message has been received, the server will send a `CONNECT` message to provide more information about the current connection as well as security information.

#### Syntax

`CONNECT {["option_name":option_value],...}`

The valid options are as follows:

* `verbose`: Turns on [`+OK`](#OKERR) protocol acknowledgements.
* `pedantic`: Turns on additional strict format checking, e.g. for properly formed subjects
* `tls_required`: Indicates whether the server requires an SSL connection.
* `auth_token`:  Authorization token
* `user`: Connection username (if `auth_required` is set)
* `pass`: Connection password (if `auth_required` is set)
* `name`: Generated Server Name
* `lang`: The implementation language of the server (go).
* `version`: The version of the server.

#### Example

Here is an example from the default string from a server.

`CONNECT {"verbose":false,"pedantic":false,"tls_required":false,"name":"wt0vffeQyoDGMVBC2aKX0b"}\r\n`

Servers should set `verbose` to `false` by default. This means that other routed servers will not be sending an `+OK` payload back after the remote server ingested the message.

## <a name="PUB"></a>PUB

#### Description
The `PUB` message publishes the message payload to the given subject name, optionally supplying a reply subject, to another server. If a reply subject is supplied, it will be delivered to eligible subscribers along with the supplied payload. Note that the payload itself is optional. To omit the payload, set the payload size to 0.

#### Syntax

`PUB <subject> [reply-to] <#bytes>\r\n[payload]\r\n`

where:

* `subject`: The destination subject to publish to
* `reply-to`: The reply inbox subject that subscribers can use to send a response back to the publisher/requestor
* `#bytes`: The payload size in bytes
* `payload`: The message payload data

#### Example

To publish the string message payload "Hello NATS!" to subject FOO:

`PUB FOO 11\r\nHello NATS!\r\n`

To publish a request message "Knock Knock" to subject FRONT.DOOR with reply subject INBOX.22:

`PUB FRONT.DOOR INBOX.22 11\r\nKnock Knock\r\n`

To publish an empty message to subject NOTIFY:

`PUB NOTIFY 0\r\n\r\n`

## <a name="SUB"></a>SUB

#### Description

`SUB` initiates a subscription to a subject, optionally joining a distributed queue group.

#### Syntax

**Basic Subscription**: `SUB <subject> RSID:<cid>:<sid>\r\n`

**Queue Subscription**: `SUB <subject> <queue> QRSID:<cid>:<sid>\r\n`

where:

* `subject`: The subject name to subscribe to
* `queue`: If specified, the subscriber will join this queue group
* `cid`: A 64bit unsigned integer representing the client connection
* `sid`: A unique alphanumeric subscription ID representing the server's subscription

#### Example

To subscribe to the subject `FOO` with the local unique subject identifier of `1`, and the connection-unique subject identifier (sid) `1`:

`SUB FOO RSID:1:1\r\n`

To subscribe the current connection to the subject `BAR` as part of distribution queue group `G1` with local sid of `14`, and a client sid `44`:

`SUB BAR G1 QRSID:14:44\r\n`

## <a name="UNSUB"></a>UNSUB

#### Description

`UNSUB` unsubcribes the connection from the specified subject, or auto-unsubscribes after the specified number of messages has been received.  It is sent by a server when one of it's clients unsubscribes.

#### Syntax

**Basic Subscription**: `UNSUB <sid> RSID:<cid>:<sid> [max_msgs]\r\n`

**Queue Subscription**: `UNSUB <sid> QRSID:<cid>:<sid> [max_msgs]\r\n`

where:

* `sid`: The unique alphanumeric subscription ID of the subject to unsubscribe from
* `max_msgs`: Number of messages to wait for before automatically unsubscribing
* `cid`: A 64bit unsigned integer representing the client connection
* `sid`: A unique alphanumeric subscription ID representing the server's subscription

#### Example

The following examples concern subject `FOO` which has been assigned an internal subscriber id of `5`, and a client sid of `1`. To unsubscribe from `FOO`:

`UNSUB RSID:5:1\r\n`

To auto-unsubscribe from `FOO` after 5 messages have been received:

`UNSUB RSID:1:1 5\r\n`

## <a name="MSG"></a>MSG

#### Description

The `MSG` protocol message delivers a message from another server.

#### Syntax

`MSG <subject> <sid> [reply-to] <#bytes>\r\n[payload]\r\n`

where:

* `subject`: Subject name this message was received on
* `sid`: The unique alphanumeric subscription ID of the subject
* `reply-to`: The inbox subject on which the publisher is listening for responses
* `#bytes`: Size of the payload in bytes
* `payload`: The message payload data

#### Example

The following message delivers a message from subject `FOO.BAR`:

`MSG FOO.BAR 9 11\r\nHello World\r\n`

Deliver the same message along with a reply inbox:

`MSG FOO.BAR 9 INBOX.34 11\r\nHello World\r\n`

## <a name="PINGPONG"></a>PING/PONG

#### Description

`PING` and `PONG` implement a simple keep-alive mechanism between servers. Once two servers establish a connection with each other, the NATS server will continuously send `PING` messages to other servers at a configurable interval. If another server fails to respond with a `PONG` message within the configured response interval, the server will terminate its connection. If your connection stays idle for too long, it is cut off.

If the another server sends a ping request, a server will reply with a pong message to notify the other server that it is still present.

#### Syntax

`PING\r\n`
`PONG\r\n`

## <a name="OKERR"></a>+OK/ERR

#### Description

When the `verbose` connection option is set to `true` (the default value), the server acknowledges each well-formed protocol message with a `+OK` message. NATS servers set the `verbose` option to `false` using the [CONNECT](#CONNECT) message

The `-ERR` message is used by the server indicate a protocol, authorization, or other runtime connection error to another server. Most of these errors result in the server closing the connection.

Handling of these errors usually has to be done asynchronously.

#### Syntax

`+OK`

`-ERR <error message>`

Protocol error messages which close the connection:

- `-ERR 'Unknown Protocol Operation'`: Unknown protocol error
- `-ERR 'Authorization Violation'`: Server failed to authenticate to another server with credentials specified in the [CONNECT](#CONNECT) message.
- `-ERR 'Authorization Timeout'`: Server took too long to authenticate to another server after establishing a connection (default 1 second)
- `-ERR 'Parser Error'`: Cannot parse the protocol message sent by another server
- `-ERR 'Stale Connection'`: PING/PONG interval expired.
- `-ERR 'Slow Consumer'`: The other server's pending data size for the route connection has been exceeded.  The default limit is time based, where data cannot be flushed within a two second write deadline.
- `-ERR 'Maximum Payload Exceeded'`: Server attempted to publish a message with a payload size that exceeds the `max_payload` size configured on another server.

Protocol error messages which do not close the connection:

- `-ERR 'Invalid Subject'`: Server sent a malformed subject (e.g. `sub foo. 90`)
